We got the general authentication flow up and running,
we're not protecting unauthenticated access to the recipes route, we'll do so soon.
First of all though, I want to make sure that once we are authenticated, we don't just keep that status
as long as we're navigating around in the app
but that we also keep that status, that we also keep that token which we have once we reload the page
because at the moment when we reload the page we lose all that status because when you reload the
page, your Angular application restarts, the old one is basically dumped
and since right now, we're managing everything in memory,
remember that we're storing the token in a user model which happens in Javascript only and which therefore
happens in memory, since we manage that all in memory,
we'll lose all that state whenever the application restarts because that memory gets cleared automatically,
there is no connection between the last time we ran this Angular app on this web page and the current
time.
So there is no connection and the memory is lost,
so if we want to store that token, we have to store it somewhere else and not in a Javascript variable
or class property,
we have to store it in a persistent storage
that survives page reloads and browser restarts, that we can write to and that we can fetch data
from.
Now what would be such a storage? In a browser, you've got different storages, you can't access the normal
file system on your device but you can work with cookies or with local storage, which is an API exposed
by the browser to store simple key-value pairs basically on the filesystem but controlled by the browser
and we will use local storage here to store that token. To do that, let's go to the handle authentication
method in the auth service, which is where we do create our user object and emit it to our application
and there,
besides emitting it to the application, we also want to store it in our storage. Now for that, we can
simply use local storage and call set item,
this allows you to write an item to the local storage and to store data there.
Now there, I will give this a name of user data and this name is up to you,
this is basically the key by which you will be able to retrieve it later and then you have to write
some data to that key, you can store some data there.
Now the data I want to store there should just be that user object because that contains all the data
I want to save - the e-mail, the user ID, the token and the expiration date,
these are the pieces of data I want to store. So we can write the user to the local storage, though
not like that, not as a Javascript object,
instead we have to convert it to a string.
We can do that with the JSON object and the stringify method, that is built into Javascript
and it simply serializes a Javascript object,
it converts a Javascript object to a string version of it
so to say, so to text and that text is getting stored in the local storage.
Let me show you how this works.
If we save that and the application therefore restarts, if we go to authenticate and we do login here,
it works as before but now in the Chrome dev tools, if you go to the application tab there, you can
go to local storage and expand this and there, pick your storage and you should see that user data key
there now
and in there, you find that data you just saved to the storage
and this is all text, it's the Javascript object converted to a text, hence you there see the e-mail, you
see the long token, you see token expiration date, all of that is stored in there. Now and with all of
that being stored in there, we can of course also retrieve it from there when our application restarts.
For that we can add a new method which I will name auto login because it basically is a method that
will try to automatically set the user to login when the application starts and it will do so by looking
into the storage and checking whether there is an existing user snapshot stored. So in auto login,
the goal now will be to retrieve data from the local storage. For that we can access the local storage
and get our user data item and that is a synchronous method which gives us our user data like that, so
we can retrieve user data from local storage just like this. The first thing which I'll do then is I
will check whether that exists, if we don't have user data,
so if this is false-ish, we can return because in this case,
we can't log the user in,
there is no stored user data
so the user definitely needs to sign in on his own.
Otherwise if we make it past this check, user data is set and there is some snapshot we were able to
retrieve from that local storage.
Now important, the snapshot we're retrieving here is also a string because we're saving it as a string
down there and therefore if we want to work with that as a normal Javascript object, we have to convert
it back by calling JSON.parse here and this will simply just take the string in JSON format and convert it
back into a Javascript object. Not into our user model though, it will not have this token getter for
example but into a simple object literal which has all the keys that we stored in that storage,
so basically this string here converted back to an object literal in Javascript. With that, here in auto
login, we can create a new loaded user by calling new user
and there, we now can pass in data from that user snapshot we're loading.
Now we can add a type annotation here to be more specific about which type of data we'll have in that
snapshot and that we'll have an e-mail which is of type string,
we'll have an ID which is of type string, we'll have _token which is a string and we'll have
_tokenExpirationDate, is that what I named it? This key here, we'll have that in here as well
and this will also be a string, not a date object, we'll have to convert this manually.
So that's the data we're fetching from the local storage and therefore now when we create a new user,
we can pass in user data e-mail, we can pass in user data ID, we can pass in user data _token,
_token because our token getter as I mentioned is part of the user model but we can't save
methods in a JSON snapshot and therefore it only contains the properties we had in there which are
these four properties.
So we retrieve the _token and also the expiration date,
we just need to convert this to a date object again which you can do with the built-in date constructor
to which we simply pass our token expiration date string because that string is basically a date format
string, you can see it here at the bottom and Javascript is smart enough to convert this back into a
date object.
This is now the loaded user with whom we can interact and there, we first of all need to check if
this user has a valid token. So we can simply check if loaded user token, if that's true-ish.
Now remember, token now is a getter because now we're working with the model again and in that token
getter, we are comparing the token expiration date that was stored with the current date.
So this will return null which is a false-ish value if there is an invalid token, if
the token expiration date is in the past.
So this will only be true-ish if it is a valid token which still has an expiration date in the future
and therefore only when we make it into this if check, we want to emit this loaded user as the currently
active user.
So in here, we can then access this user, our subject, call next and forward the loaded user as our new
authenticated user because at this point of time, we know we have a user with all the data we loaded
and the token also still is valid,
so this is our logged in user. This is the auto login function,
now let's see if it works, let's go to a place that runs early in our application lifecycle and that
would be the app component because this runs as soon as the app starts, we don't need these functions in
there. Let's now implement onInit here
so that we are forced to add ngOnInit, we
can also get rid of that feature selected part here in the app header by the way,
this is all something we don't need anymore,
we're not using that function anymore.
So back to the app component, here in ngOnInit, in the app component,
I want to use the auth service,
so it's time to inject it here, auth service like that,
make sure to add the import path at the top so that this gets imported correctly
and with that injected in ngOnInit, let's call this auth service auto login to see whether that works.
If I now save this,
theoretically we should log the user in automatically because we have a saved snapshot
and indeed if I reload, this looks good. The entire user interface, the entire header signals that
the user is logged in,
otherwise we would not be seeing the recipes page and the logout button here. So automatically, logging
the user in seems to work correctly here.